KEP-4578: Server Feature Gate in etcd (#4610)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-etcd/4578-server-feature-gate/README.md

* no clear path to graduate flags, as removal of experimental prefix is a breaking change in command line.
* unclear, undocumented feature flag graduation criteria. So very often features get stuck or forgotten in experimental phase.
* no method for clients to query and make decisions based on feature enablement in a cluster.
* each `--experimental` flag will have to be piped through the code based separately. It is cumbersome, nothing stops them being modified somewhere along the path, and some code changes might slip through and not be guarded by the flag.

We are proposing to introduce Kubernetes style [feature gates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) into etcd to address these issues.

### Goals

* Introduce a single mechanism in the code base for enabling/disabling features with code changes guarded behind the mechanism without risking breaking the rest of the server if the feature is disabled.

* Introduce a way for a client to find out what features are enabled in the server.

* Codify lifecycle stages of a feature, and clear tracking and documentation of feature lifecycle progression.

### Non-Goals

> * Handle the feature gate enablement on the cluster level. It would be designed in a separate KEP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Handle the feature gate enablement on the cluster level. They require more careful consideration and thus warrants a  separate KEP.
```

* Migrate all existing `--experimental` features to feature gate. 

>   * While feature gate provides a [path to deprecate existing `--experimental` features]((#path-to-migrate-existing-experimental-features)), and we will migrate several `--experimental` during the feature gate implementation as examples, the completion of the KEP does not require migrating all existing `--experimental` features. It can be done as followup tasks.

Reviewer: Don't exactly agree, we shouldn't add a second standard for managing features without having a plan for the first one. This KEP should propose a plan to migrate (and not leave any flags behind) to feature gates and execution of this should be done as part of the KEP effort.

Author: ok. Added migration as part of the goal, and Milestone 3.

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Is feature enablement state a server level or cluster level property?

There are simple features like `ExperimentalEnableDistributedTracing` (enables distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry protocol), which could work fine at the local server level.

There are also features like `ExperimentalEnableLeaseCheckpoint` (enables leader to send regular checkpoints to other members to prevent reset of remaining TTL on leader change), if different server nodes have different enablement values for `ExperimentalEnableLeaseCheckpoint`, the results would be inconsistent depending on which one is the leader and confusing.

There are also more critial features like changing the Apply logic of a raft message. All members have to agree on whether to use the new logic or old logic, otherwise it could break correctness.

So feature gate should be able to handle both server level and cluster level features. Since cluster level feature consensus is itself a complicated problem. We will defer it to its own KEP, and only focus on the server level feature gate in this KEP.

#### Is feature gate a replacement of boolean flags?
No. 

> Feature gate is meant to facilitate the safe development of a feature and guard any code changes behind the gate. It is not a feature configuration. A feature could have many other flags as its configuration, including boolean flags. If you think the user would still need to be able to toggle its configuration on/off when the feature graduates and becomes an integral part of etcd, then you would need a boolean configuration flag in addition to the feature gate when introducing the feature.

Reviewer: tldr; we should only consider feature flags, for knobs that we plan to make default and force enabled for etcd instances. For optional knobs we should keep a command line flags.

| Feature Stage | Properties | Minimum Graduation Criteria |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Alpha | Same as [Kubernetes feature stages - Alpha feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages): <ul><li>Disabled by default. </li><li>Might be buggy. Enabling the feature may expose bugs. </li><li>Support for feature may be dropped at any time without notice. </li><li>The API may change in incompatible ways in a later software release without notice. </li><li>Recommended for use only in short-lived testing clusters, due to increased risk of bugs and lack of long-term support.</li></ul> | Before moving a feature to Beta, it should have <ul><li> Full unit/integration/e2e/robustness test coverage.</li><li>Full performance benchmark/test if applicable.</li><li> No significant changes for at least 1 minor release.</li></ul> |

> | Beta | Same as [Kubernetes feature stages - Beta feature](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/#feature-stages) except etcd Beta feature does not allow incompatible schema change: <ul><li>Enabled by default. </li><li>The feature is well tested. Enabling the feature is considered safe.</li><li>Support for the overall feature will not be dropped, though details may change.</li><li>Recommended for only non-business-critical uses because of potential for discovering new hard-to-spot bugs through wider adoption.</li></ul> | Before moving a feature to GA, it should have <ul><li> Widespread usage.</li><li>No bug reported for at least 1 minor release.</li></ul> |

Reviewer 2: Minor comment:
- For Alpha -> Beta, should add Criteria: `No unresolved major bugs`.
- For Beta -> GA, update criteria:  `No major bug reported for at least 1 minor release`

Note they are just minimal Graduation Criteria.

## Summary

We are introducing the Kubernetes style feature gate framework into etcd to gate future feature enhancement behind a sequence of feature lifecyles. Users would be able to turn features on or off and query feature enablement of an etcd server in a consistent way. 

## Motivation

Currently any new enhancements to the etcd are typically added as [an experimental feature](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/main/Documentation/contributor-guide/features.md#adding-a-new-feature), with a configuration flag prefixed with "experimental", e.g. --experimental-feature-name. 

When it is time to [graduate an experimental feature to stable](https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/main/Documentation/contributor-guide/features.md#graduating-an-experimental-feature-to-stable), a new stable feature flag identical to the experimental feature flag but without the --experimental prefix is added to replace the old feature flag, which is a breaking change.

We are proposing to add [feature gates](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/) in the similar way as Kubernetes does, so that can turn on or off any feature using the `--feature-gates` flag.

> Benefits from this enhancement includes:

Reviewer: You are mixing benefits vs motivation. Motivation should discuss why it's worth to introduce feature flags:
* Unclear, undocumented feature flag graduation
  * hard to know when and why feature was introduced
  * features stuck in experimental because we forgot about them
* No clear path to graduate flags, as removal of experimental prefix is a breaking change in command line

etc

Author: updated

* graduating a feature is no longer a breaking change with new flags.

* well-established feature lifecycle convention from Kubernetes.

* a unified place to store all the feature enablement state in the code base for simplicity, and easy to refer to in guarding the implementation code.

> * easy to query if a feature is available for an ectd server.

Reviewer 3: > graduating a feature is no longer a breaking change with new flags.

No. You still need to toggle the gate, which is equivalent to changing command line args.

> well-established feature lifecycle convention from Kubernetes

It works for Kubernetes doesn't necessarily mean it will work for etcd.
Not everything in the world are there to be copied.

> a unified place to store all the feature enablement state in the code base for simplicity, and easy to refer to in guarding the implementation code.

This has nothing to do with feature gates. Users typically don't care how code are organized and we should not force them to.
Exposing flags or configuration items are acceptable when there are user visible changes are introduced.

> easy to query if a feature is available for an ectd server.

When people over engineering something, there always are "reasons".
Please think twice ... do we really need this?

Reviewer: > Please think twice ... do we really need this?

Yes, thank you for your feedback.

### Goals

> * Introduce the `--feature-gates` flag in etcd code base.

Reviewer: That's not a goal, that's an implementation detail. We need a single mechanism for enabling/disabling features that will not cause breaking changes.

Author: updated

> * Introduce apis/methods to query the enablement state of a feature.

Reviewer: Creating a API is not a goal per se, can you explain what functionality you want to provide to users.

Author: updated

> * Establish lifecycle stages of a feature, and clear criteria of lifecycle progression.

Reviewer: We have a lifecycle of features https://github.com/etcd-io/etcd/blob/main/Documentation/contributor-guide/features.md, they are just not codified.

Author: updated

### Non-Goals

* Handle the feature gate enablement on the cluster level. It would be designed in a separate KEP.

> * Migrate all existing `--experimental` features to feature gate. 

Reviewer: That's a bad example of non-goal, we cannot remove `--experiential` at all as it's a breaking change.

Author: migrating does not mean removing. This is here because questions were asked if this KEP will take care of all experimental flags.

  * While feature gate provides a [path to deprecate existing `--experimental` features]((#path-to-migrate-existing-experimental-features)), and we will migrate several `--experimental` during the feature gate implementation as examples, the completion of the KEP does not require migrating all existing `--experimental` features. It can be done as followup tasks.

* Use feature gate as a mechanism to fix bugs.

## Proposal

### User Stories (Optional)

#### Story 1

> It would be easier for developers to add new features without worrying too much about breaking etcd, because the feature would be Alpha first and disabled by default, and new changes would be mostly gated behind the feature gate.

Reviewer: That's not a user story, a user story would be:
1. contributor adds a feature, they add `--experimental-my-feature-flag`
2. In next minor release want to graduate a feature, to do that they need to add `--my-feature-flag` flag, but cannot remove the old flag to avoid breaking change
3. Another minor release happens, we finally remove the flag, however due X years passing contributor left the project so we forgot about the flag.

Author: updated

It would be a smoother process to move the feature to the next stage without the need to introduce a potentially breaking change of an `--experimental` flag.

#### Story 2

> Users of etcd cluster would be able to find out which features are enabled in the etcd server and decide on how to use them downstream. 

Author: Thanks for the suggestion. Will add in the cluster fg KEP.

Currently Kubernetes uses [`FeatureSupportChecker`](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/db82fd1604ebf327ab74cde0a7158a8d95d46202/staging/src/k8s.io/apiserver/pkg/storage/etcd3/feature/feature_support_checker.go#L42) to check if a feature is supported by etcd, which basically checks the etcd version and compares the version with a hard-coded map of feature availability for different etcd versions.

#### Story 3

> In a HA cluster, users should be able to enable/disable a feature for each server without bring down the whole cluster, by restarting the servers with the new feature gate flag one by one. 

Reviewer: This doesn't explain why you need bring down the whole cluster. If you mean features that want to change how apply loop works, in such situations even shutting down whole cluster will not prevent mistakes.

Author: removed.

#### Story 4

> Users of etcd cluster would like to know if they could use a new feature, but it requires all the etcd servers to agree on the feature enablement. Until the feature gate can handle cluster level features (another KEP), we will not expose querying feature enablement of any cluster level features, because we cannot risk possible conflicting settings that might break cluster correctness.

Reviewer: We should explain why all etcd servers need to agree on feature enablement. Again issue with supporting window. If we sending a proto with a new field will is not detected in grpc (it's backward compatible), this leads to old clusters interpreting the request differently. We don't know whether every cluster member will interpret the proto in the same way.

Author: will defer to cluster feature gate kep.

Reviewer: SG

### Notes/Constraints/Caveats (Optional)

#### Is feature enablement state a server level or cluster level property?

There are simple features like `ExperimentalEnableDistributedTracing` (enables distributed tracing using OpenTelemetry protocol), which could work fine at the local server level.

There are also features like `ExperimentalEnableLeaseCheckpoint` (enables leader to send regular checkpoints to other members to prevent reset of remaining TTL on leader change), if different server nodes have different enablement values for `ExperimentalEnableLeaseCheckpoint`, the results would be inconsistent depending on which one is the leader and confusing.

> There are also more critial features like changing the Apply logic of a raft message. All members have to agree on whether to use the new logic or old logic, otherwise it could could break correctness.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are also more critial features like changing the Apply logic of a raft message. All members have to agree on whether to use the new logic or old logic, otherwise it could break correctness.
```

* bugs in etcd could be hard to detect, and the reliability and robustness of etcd is more important than speed. A long history of testing through practical adoption a new feature is beneficial.

With the feature gate in place, we could consider increasing the etcd release cadence because it would be easier to add new features and less risky to release new features.

### Risks and Mitigations

* As discussed before, we are deferring cluster level feature support to a follow-up KEP.

## Design Details

### New APIs

A new `--feature-gates` command line argument would be added to start the etcd server, with format like `--feature-gates=featureA=true,featureB=false`. The flag can also be set in the `config-file`.

New Prometheus gauge metrics would be added to monitor and query if a feature is enabled for the server. 
For easier usage in Kubernetes, we will also add a grpc backed `clientv3` function and a new `etcdctl` command.

The metrics could look like:
* `etcd_feature_enabled{name="featureName",stage="Alpha"} 1` if the feature is enabled.

> For grpc, new rpc type would be added to the `Maintenance` service.

Reviewer: For a server level feature I don't see any benefits of having dedicated API. Kubernetes doesn't have dedicated API.

I think there are considerations regarding if client can depend on feature flags not changing that would require a deeper discussion that would need to include cluster level feature flags. Please skip the API changes for now.

Author: removed.

```proto
service Maintenance {
  ...
  rpc FeatureGateStatus(FeatureGateStatusRequest) returns (FeatureGateStatusResponse) {
    option (google.api.http) = {
      post: "/v3/maintenance/featuregate"
      body: "*"
    };
  }
  ...
}
message Feature {
  string name = 1;
  bool enabled = 2;
}
message FeatureGateStatusRequest {
  repeated string features = 2;
}
message FeatureGateStatusResponse {
  ResponseHeader header = 1;
  repeated Feature features = 3;
}
```

The clientv3 function would look like:

```go
package clientv3

type Maintenance interface {
  FeatureGateStatus(ctx context.Context, features ...string) (*FeatureGateStatusResponse, error)
}
```

The `etcdctl` commands could look like:
* `etcdctl endpoint featuregate $featureName` returns true if the feature is enabled

### Feature Gate

> We will use the new `k8s.io/component-base/featuregate.VersionedSpecs`(introduced in [kep-4330](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/tree/master/keps/sig-architecture/4330-compatibility-versions)) to register and track the features along with their lifecycle at different release versions. 

Reviewer: I think we should avoid a circular dependency on K8s.

Reviewer: cc @dims

Reviewer 4: agree, let's figure out a way *without* circular dependency!

Author: ok, we will copy the code to `pkg\`

Reviewer: Sounds good, we can decide on long term solution when it's appropriate.

```go
defaultServerFeatureGates := map[Feature]VersionedSpecs {
		featureA: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.6"), Default: false, PreRelease: Beta},
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: true, PreRelease: GA},
		},
		featureB: VersionedSpecs{
			{Version: mustParseVersion("3.7"), Default: false, PreRelease: Alpha},
		},
}
```

The feature gates for a server can only be set with the `--feature-gates`flag or in the `config-file` during startup. We do not support dynamically changing the feature gates when the server is running.

The `ServerConfig` struct will have a new `featureGate k8s.io/component-base/featuregate.FeatureGate`(immutable) field. `EtcdServer` would have an interface of `FeatureEnabled(key Feature) bool`, and it can be referenced throughout the server.

```go
type ServerConfig struct {
  ...
  // ServerFeatureGate server level feature gate
  ServerFeatureGate featuregate.FeatureGate
  ...
}

func (s *EtcdServer) FeatureEnabled(key Feature) bool
```

### Feature Stages

> Following the convention of Kubernetes, a feature can go through a lifecycle of Alpha → Beta → GA → Deprecated.

Reviewer: Is this new convention you are proposing? Can you reference any existing documentation and describe how it is expanded or adjusted.

Author: The feature stage `Properties` are copied from Kubernetes. I added the `Minimum Graduation Criteria`

Reviewer: Please document them in KEP.

| Feature Stage | Properties | Graduation Criteria |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Alpha | <ul><li>Disabled by default. </li><li>Might be buggy. Enabling the feature may expose bugs. </li><li>Support for feature may be dropped at any time without notice. </li><li>The API may change in incompatible ways in a later software release without notice. </li><li>Recommended for use only in short-lived testing clusters, due to increased risk of bugs and lack of long-term support.</li></ul> | Before moving a feature to Beta, it should have <ul><li> Full unit/integration/e2e/robustness test coverage.</li><li>Full performance benchmark/test if applicable.</li><li> No significant changes for at least 1 minor release.</li><li>Other feature specific criteria in the feature KEP. </li></ul> |

> | Beta | <ul><li>Enabled by default. </li><li>The feature is well tested. Enabling the feature is considered safe.</li><li>Support for the overall feature will not be dropped, though details may change.</li><li>Recommended for only non-business-critical uses because of potential for discovering new hard-to-spot bugs through wider adoption.</li></ul> | Before moving a feature to GA, it should have <ul><li> Widespread usage.</li><li>No bug reported for at least 1 minor release.</li><li>Other feature specific criteria in the feature KEP. </li></ul> |

Author: removed the KEP part.

> | GA | <ul><li>The feature is always enabled; you cannot disable it.</li><li>The corresponding feature gate is no longer needed.</li><li>Stable versions of features will appear in released software for many subsequent versions.</li></ul> | Before deprecating a GA feature, it should have <ul><li> Feature deprecation announcement.</li><li>No user impacting change for at least 1 minor release.</li><li>Other feature specific criteria in the feature KEP. </li></ul> |

Reviewer 2: > GA | The feature is always enabled; you cannot disable it.

Question: does it mean that a GAed feature will never have a bool flag (i.e. `--pre-vote`) for users to enable or disable it?

When a feature is GAed, it only means that its quality meets some criteria. But it may still make sense for users to enable or disable it for different scenarios or purpose, and it's exactly the reason why there are still some bool flags in api-server and etcd.

Author: feature gates are not replacement of boolean flags. They are different concepts. Feature gate is meant to facilitate the development of a feature. A feature could have many other flags, including boolean flags. Here is one example in K8s: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/5a121aad53a819c3c9b26a6b5866b1ea8c686f5b/pkg/kubelet/apis/config/validation/validation.go#L142

Reviewer: We should utilize feature flags for all new features to clearly indicate their maturity to users. While most features should be enabled by default at GA, some features like pre-vote introduce tradeoffs that users might want to control. In these cases, a separate toggle could be provided.

The beta stage is the ideal time to assess whether a feature should be permanently enabled by default or if an off switch is warranted. We need to ensure the feature consistently provides positive value with minimal downsides users might want to mitigate. For GA, the feature flag would be locked to its default state, with the potential addition of a separate boolean flag if needed.
